He probably never even heard of radar. He had never
heard of radar. And this was just like a voice from
above.
May have made a religious man out of him.
But I think this is what we're beginning to see now a
little bit in oceanography.
So many of the things that would have been not
possible 20 or 30 years ago, are now becoming
commonplace.
If you had some advice you would like to offer a
young person, what in oceanography or what
particular aspect of oceanography would you
suggest to that person that he or she do? Well, I
haven't advised students for a few years now.
Formerly, when a student came down to talk to me
about entering oceanography, I would try to see
what his goals in life were, and
how long he expected to go, and so on. And I told him
that in oceanography, just from the
prerequisites we had, that he would get a very
broad basic training in the sciences, and that
this was essential. Then he could later go on his
way. If he wanted to make money and get through
quickly, why I told him that you'd never make much
money in oceanography, that something like that,
why you would be better to shift to some other
discipline and stay in a particular discipline,
and you would be on the production line at an
earlier date.
But if you wanted to to continue in a very
interesting field that had many ramifications
outside of your own particular area of interest,
you would always find that you had so much more to do
than you could possibly do that it would be very
satisfying.
And as a result, we've had people go through and
quite a few of them have shifted over to medicine of
all things after they've taken some oceanography
because we require this chemistry and the other
sciences which gave them a good
background.
And so I've always maintained that the first step
was to get a good, broad, basic education
so you could be acquainted with the different
facets, able to do a lot of things, and then to
specialize in something that was of particular
interest to you. We lost some students that way.
But I think the ones we retained were probably
never felt that they were shortchanged.
And it's surprising to watch what some of the
people did go into after they had had their
training in oceanography. Well, Washington has
what amounts to, or Washington had what amounted
to, the only undergraduate school of
oceanography in the country, and certainly had
the first. That's right. Were there any sort of
deliberate plans or ideas you had in terms of the
creation of the school? Did you have some sort of a
broad concept of what you thought an
oceanographer should be?
Well, we've often felt that an oceanographer
should have. a broad training in the physical and
the biological sciences and the math base. And of
course, these
were hard to become harder to fulfill as we become
more sophisticated in all of the contributing
disciplines.
One example, at Friday Harbor, there was a course
given that Dr. Thompson called Omnology,
which bracketed the field. And so in this
particular course, there would be people from the
biological sciences, Bob Miller, for example,
that was director of the California Academy of
Sciences for many years, Steinhardt Aquarium,
that was here, and Utterback in physics, Thompson
in chemistry, and
other zoologists, botanists and zoologists,
contributed to this course to sort of give people a
broad understanding of the general area. and not
to force people in any particular direction, but
to open their eyes on the spectrum in which they can
look and make up their own minds. In that way, if
they choose unwisely,
it's more or less their own doing. But if they
choose unwisely without having some sort of a
concept of what other alternatives there are,
then I think that's part of the blame of the
instructional staff.
Now, I have now sort of a couple of questions I'd
like to ask concerning what amounts to the period
between about 1939 and about 1945, 1946. In the
Hydrographic Office, and on the Bikini Test and in
sort of the early work in the Arctic. Did you notice
much conflict between military and civilian
personnel in terms of approaches to oceanography
or personality clashes either at the Test or in the
Hydrographic Office or what have you?
Well, I've had a little bit of experience on both
sides. And personally, I've always gotten along
very well with both the civilian and military. But
whenever you get these different groups
together, they've, as a rule, been brought up
through different things. pathways of training
and so on. They each have their own job. So you
expect, at times, a little bit of friction. One of
them is based on action and directing other people
a great deal. And the other is based on the science
of the situation, what
we know for sure, what's imagination. And
that sort of thing. There have been, and I've
worked on a lot of different ships with a lot of
different people, and it comes down, I think, not
so much as to the difference between a civilian
scientist and a particular naval officer.
as far as their different routines are concerned,
but goes back to the individuals, the people that
can see both sides of a question and leave a
flexibility. There are certain situations where
the first thing you must do is save the ship. It
takes precedence over all else. There are other
times when... you must accomplish your
scientific protection or the mission is a
failure. And it goes back to the personalities. So
some cruises are highly successful. Other
cruises may work out not too satisfactorily.
in terms of the beginning, you know, the bringing
in of the ships and the vessels, and research time,
really, is what I'm thinking of. There was a time
when you first began, in terms of oceanography,
where there were just sort of blanket grants, and
this is also sort of a follow-up on military and
civilian conflicts, possibly, sort of blanket
grants given to an institution, and the
institution sort of dispersed the grants and and
allowed one to work on his project. And then later
on it seems to me that oceanography became more
mission oriented and in one sense and in the other
sense in terms of giving grants you had to apply
individually for grants and the grants were
awarded based upon the individual project. Now
Which way did you prefer it? Did you prefer it where
the institution just sort of received the grant
and then divide the money up in faculty? Or did you
prefer it after NSF came along and you applied for
individual grants? Well, both methods have their
advantages and drawbacks. I think if you're
starting up, Bob, something that
I really believe that the early formulation of the
Office of Naval Research, which I was pretty well
acquainted with as it grew back in Washington,
D.C., and the early years where they gave money to
the institutions, I think that was a remarkable
system. I think the Office of National Research
has done a very good job over the years. And some of
that same group, of course, went over to the
National Science Foundation. I was at one time in
my career involved a little bit in going back and
looking over the programs as part of the
group that were advising on oceanography,
the executive office of the president, and
trying to pass out
things. But I think you have to have a little bit of
both, really. Because, well, of course, there's
an awful lot of time lost now in what I call
overhead, which not only as far as the funds are
concerned, but I'm thinking of scientist time.
You mean in grant writing and proposal writing? In
grant writing, proposal writing, and so on. And
this will work in different ways. If you have a
benign godfather that looks out after all your
interests and takes care of this for you and gives
you then full freedom and the funds to go ahead
with, that's beautiful. But there's always a day
of reckoning.
And it goes back to the individual, and it goes back
to cooperation all along the line. Between the
individual scientists and the administration in
his own particular department or so on, and then in
the university, it must be framed within the
university administration as well. So it takes a
lot of give and take all along the line. And the
better knowledge the different levels have and
the understanding, they can do a very good job of
administering sometimes if they don't know too
much of the details. But when the chips are really
down, to be sure that you're getting a high
percentage of efficiency, why it takes the people
in their different ranks to know an awful lot about
what goes on at all levels. And I think this is
probably one of the problems in government today,
that it's become so complex that you just don't
have this direct contact, this chain of knowledge
that goes through from the beginning raw
materials, you might say, to the finished
product.
In the organization of the early O&R office, I
assume the idea must have come from Roger Revelle.
Is that correct? Well, Roger Revelle was over in
the Bureau of Ships and was in a very strategic
position there. He was responsible here in a major
sense for the scientific operations in the In 46
that I mentioned. Yeah. And so, but there were
others that also involved
a great deal in that. Now, Roger was back on the
scene. And from the strict oceanographic
standpoint, he was sort of the champion along that
particular. But
we had a number of people that were very
knowledgeable.
And for a while, the Navy had the Research and
Development Board, you see. And we had some good
heads there that were quite
cognizant of what was really necessary to get
something going in oceanography. Before that, we
had had, of course, the Rockefeller Fund in the
30s, which built the building at Scripps, Woods
Hole, and this building here. I didn't know anyone
built this building, too. Yes. This is the
Rockefeller Fund building.
And I
think from that sort of a stimulus, getting some of
the early places going in Hawaii, and then the next
big step, I would say, was the Office of Naval
Research, which really got things going. in a more
modern sense in oceanography. There had been an
awful lot of the people involved in this that were
very much connected with the operations during
World War II. And so they had a good grasp. A lot of
them were civilians at all times. But there were
also some of the Navy people that were quite
cognizant of what was going on. Were you unhappy
when, that's the wrong choice of word, were you
surprised rather and somewhat chagrined when the
ONR swings away from really research and
development and into mission-oriented work
almost exclusively?
I think
that you have to have a mix in this. I would say that
if you're exclusively mission-oriented,
what hurt you is maybe not what you do, but what
you're not aware of or don't do.
that you have to have this broad freedom of free
inquiry to set the base for the future.
When the chips are down, you don't have much chance
or time to find out the basic information you need
to carry out your operations. then you've got to
take what you've got at that time. And it becomes
mostly inoperational. But in the easy times in the
world, if there are such things, that's the time
that people should take time to learn as much as
they can about the environment and how things go.
and to push some of, many will be dead ends, but to
push some of this information to its
ultimate end, whatever that may be.
Now, excuse me. I've got something in my throat
about the last five minutes. I must have a sign.
Scripts?
No. Uh... As I recall, I met Ravel when I was up in
Alaska on one of the cruises. Oh, okay, because he
took a cruise. He told me he had met you, and
he had intimated with sometimes in the 30s, and
then when I was listening to the tape, I couldn't
figure out when it was because I couldn't put you
two together anyplace, you see, because you just
say your assignments, woods, holes. and, you
know, and the University of Washington. So I never
really got you somehow in the, when I was looking
you up, I never really somehow got you into the
Navy. You know, it didn't make any sense to me. I was
actually in the Coast Guard. Called me in the Coast
Guard. Yeah, but I worked with the Navy. And I was in
a very unique and satisfying position. And so I
couldn't forget when you first encountered
Revell, because when they were putting those
groups of people to sit together, you know, up to
the bikini test,
I can understand why certain were selected. And I
can understand how you got there from Woods Hole,
but I never put you in the service to get you there.
That was the confusing part. I put Revell in the
service, of course. Yeah. He was already there.
Excuse me. It can't be Washington weather,
believe me.
The other... During this period, you're talking
about here in the 1940s now, there were three
people who sort of dominated the concept of grant
giving and oceanography, and the direction
oceanography was taking. And this is an
oversimplification, of course, but it's Revell,
Columbus Island, of course, and Maurice Ewing.
Yes, and I worked with New Columbus very well. The
first year I was at Atwoods Hall, why I think there
were 13 of us in the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution that were more or less permanent
residents during the wintertime. Floyd So and
myself and Columbus Island would run the risk back
and forth across Martha's Vineyard.
Dean Bumpus was there. Morris Ewing was there with
Warzel and Albine, and the Whale Man from Harvard,
Bilgeville, a part of the time. And Cywell was
there at that time. And so it was a rather small,
fairly close-knit group in some ways. And that was
the time when I became acquainted with a number of
people, early people. Norris Raikstra would come
down on weekends. Big load. He was pretty well
entranced at Harvard by that time, and hardly
ever. ever got down, but we did. Mary Sears was
there,
certainly on weekends until she finally built her
house down in Woods Hole and stayed down
there. But I think, and I'm just trying to recall
just exactly when it was that I met Revell. And it
was, I don't know whether it was I just can't place
it in 1933 or 1934
that he was up in Alaska and had met him then.
And Dick Fleming, I met I don't know what he calls it
or not, when he was up here with Moberg, I think, one
time when we had a either Pacific Science
Convention here in Seattle or something like
that. And Tommy Thompson, you see, worked with the
people at Scripps. He worked with McKeown. in
1929, in the Gulf of Alaska, on the currents, and
Van Cleve was one of our, that was out on the cruise
there. So it was this time, about that time that I
met him.
What sort of man was Columbus Islip? I had a great
admiration for Columbus.
He was rather shy, very
open-minded, I think, very concerned with
pushing forward Oceanography, as a scientist, of
course, they were pretty well healed. And you
brought the Atlantis I back to Europe and made some
cruises up on the Grand Banks, up in Labrador, I
think, fairly early on. And
I always recall him saying that this is about the
end of just the venture beginning to straighten
out. And one of his big worries here, he says, no,
the money is getting fairly tight. And I'm just
worried about laying up the Atlantis one. And
But
he says, I think we got enough information in our
data bank that we can weather out two or three years
without going to see if we have
to. Well, you know, the story was old since then.
And the man that was really one of the, well, a spill
house was occasionally down in Woods Hole, but he
was just sort of a weekend visitor at that time. But
Morris Ewing was always a go-getter as far as
getting an awful lot done and being a good
scientist.
And he had a good little group. going early on at
Woods Hole, working on different projects, his
underwater acoustics and so on. His services were
great.
I'll never forget one time he called up, he got
stranded up in Middlebury or something like that,
up in mid-state, up in Massachusetts. the
communications were terrible in those days he got
got called up the oceanographic institution i
happened to be the only one around that evening and
so i finally he got through he says well i'm i'm up
here with all my gear and i need to need
transportation and when can you be up and pick me up
and i'd never I don't think I'd... I don't know
whether I'd met him then or not. Of course, I knew
he... Yes, I had. I'd met him before because he'd
been out of university here one time along the
early 30s, just a trip through. And I said, well,
I'll be up and pick you up just as soon as I can get up
there. And to be standing out someplace where I can
see you, I just got there. So I went up and... and he
saw me drive up and he says, my gosh, he said, I
thought I was talking to Al Vine.
There are communications with that poor on those
old Woods Hole phones. He never forgot that. He
reminded me of it the last time I saw him here a few
years back.
But I had a great appreciation for him. And it's
very unfortunate in my area of the world to bring
one of the small ships back from Greenland. And we
gave him a choice of going out the outside, which we
always recommended. But he wanted to get back,
take the shortcut, time a little bit through the
Gulf of St. Lawrence, through the Strait of Belle
Isle, and his ship was lost with all hands from
icing conditions in the Gulf of St. Lawrence. That
was Lafarge, Mrs. Island's brother. So that was a
blow to me and to Columbus, I know.